
Switch Case : 

The switch statement in Java is used to execute one block of code among many options based on the value of an expression (usually an int, char, String, or enum).
 
When to Use switch-case :
When you have multiple conditions based on the same variable or expression.


syntax : 


switch (expression) {

    case value1:
  
       break;
        
    case value2:
      
        break;
        
   case value3:
        
        break;
        
    default:
       
}




Note : 

Keyword	     Description

switch	     Starts the switch statement and evaluates the expression.
case	     Defines a block of code that executes if the expression matches the given value.
break	     Exits from the switch block; if omitted, the code will continue executing the next case (“fall-through”).
default      Optional block that executes if no case matches.




Sample Code : 


public class SwitchStringExample {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        String color = "Red";

        switch (color) {
            case "Red":
                System.out.println("Stop!");
                break;
            case "Yellow":
                System.out.println("Ready!");
                break;
            case "Green":
                System.out.println("Go!");
                break;
            d efault:
                System.out.println("Invalid color");
        }
    }
}




Practise Questions : 



1. Write a Java program that takes an integer (1–7) and prints the corresponding day name (e.g., 1 → Monday)
2. Accept a number (1–12) from the user and print the name of the month using a switch case.
3. Accept two numbers and an operator (+, -, *, /) from the user and perform the operation using a switch case.
4. Take a grade character (A, B, C, D, F) as input and print a message:

A → Excellent
B → Good
C → Average
D → Poor
F → Fail


5. Input color name (Red, Yellow, or Green) and print the appropriate action:

Red → Stop
Yellow → Ready
Green → Go

6. Take a single character input and check whether it is a vowel or consonant using a switch statement.
7. Use a switch statement to check if a number is even or odd (hint: use number % 2 as the expression)
8. Accept a category type (Domestic, Commercial, Industrial) and print the electricity rate per unit using a switch case.
9. Take month number (1–12) and print the corresponding season:

Dec–Feb → Winter
Mar–May → Summer
Jun–Aug → Monsoon
Sep–Nov → Autumn



note : 

1. if-else : The if-else statement is used for decision making when you want to test multiple relational or logical conditions.
2. switch-case : The switch statement is used when you want to execute one block of code among many options based on a single variable’s value.











